These simple example systems can be run real mode or dummy mode.  In
real mode the real task scripts "write output files" by creating
zero-sized files, and and other tasks depend on these files as input by
checking for their existence before running. 

Also, task run time is simulated using the unix 'sleep' command, but
accelerated so that 10 sec = 1 hour for quick completion. 

userguide-1 =========== This is the simple example system described in
cylc documentation, with an additional oneoff 'startup' task that cleans
out the system work space, and an additional oneoff "coldstart" task
that provides initial restart input to the forecast models (A,B,C) in
real mode. The external tasks, located in the scripts sub-directory, are
are not aware of cylc but they are run via cylc's task wrapping
mechanism. 

in that they do not know about cylc. Cylc runs them via its
task wrapping mechanism, and all tasks necessarily depend on their
upstream dependers finishing (actually, they can depend on defined
internal outputs of the upstream tasks, but the task-wrapper can only
set these completed when the task has finished). Note also that
forecast model tasks are still aware of restart prerequisites and
outputs, even in a wrapped system case, but that any restart outputs can
only be set completed when the task finishes.

userguide-2
===========
In this system the external tasks have been modified so that cylc can
run them directly without using the task wrapping mechanism: the tasks
send their own 'started', 'finished', 'failed', and output messages when
appropriate. Thus:
 * tasks can depend on internal outputs from upstream dependers, instead
   of waiting for them to finish.
 * tasks could be switched in and out of the system at will (e.g.
   replacing one forecast model with another) so long as they provide
   the same outputs.

This system also includes a task with the 'dummy' modifier which
therefore runs cylc's external dummy task program to simulate the
defined outputs even in real mode. This can be used to "provide initial
restart inputs" for forecast models that are in reality provided by
external means (e.g. a spinup experiment) prior to starting cylc. We
don't do this in the simple examples, however, because their real tasks
do require these restart inputs, but we haven't provided a standalone
external means of providing them.


